       97

      The Messenger's Retrospect (XLI.)                          99

      Wiglaf's Sad Story
                            } (XLII.)                           103
      The Hoard Carried Off

      The Burning of Beowulf (XLIII.)                           106

      Addenda                                                   109

[vii]




PREFACE.


The present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modern
measures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. _Approximately_, I repeat; for a
very close reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be
prose to a modern ear.

The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed. Occasionally
a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient
reason. The translator does not aim to be an editor. Once in a while,
however, he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted
from the criticisms of other students of the poem.

This work is addressed to two classes of readers. From both of these alike
the translator begs sympathy and co-operation. The Anglo-Saxon scholar he
hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original. The student of
English literature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the
most ancient epic of our race. This is a bold and venturesome undertaking;
and yet there must be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow
even a daring guide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of
Hrothgar, of the prowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the
hearts of our forefathers in their primeval homes.

In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has been
used, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of
the original, permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.

Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulf
should be translated. Some have given us prose versions of what we believe
to be a great poem. Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnold
to say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is
justly called our first _epic_? Of those translators who have used verse,
several have written from what would seem a mistaken point of view. Is it
proper, for instance, that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and
Hrothgar be put in ballad measures, tripping lightly and airily along? Or,
again, is it fitting that the rough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be
interpreted to us in the smooth measures of modern blank verse? Do we hear
what has been beautifully called "the clanging tread of a warrior in
mail"?

[viii]

Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alone
gives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great
Teutonic epic.

The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near a
reproduction of the original as modern English affords. The cadences
closely resemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking
poems. The four stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as
much thesis and anacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular
cadence. Alliteration has been used to a large extent; but it was thought
that modern ears would hardly tolerate it on every line. End-rhyme has
been used occasionally; internal rhyme, sporadically. Both have some
warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (For end-rhyme, see 1_53, 1_54; for
internal rhyme, 2_21, 6_40.)

What Gummere[1] calls the "rime-giver" has been studiously kept; _viz._,
the first accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the
alliteration; and the last accented syllable alliterates only
sporadically. Alternate alliteration is occasionally used as in the
original. (See 7_61, 8_5.)

No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally
after a cæsural pause. (See 2_19 and 12_1.) Or, scientifically speaking,
Sievers's C type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of
translation. Several of his types, however, constantly occur; _e.g._ A and
a variant (/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x); B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / |
x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x); E (/ x x | / ). Anacrusis gives
further variety to the types used in the translation.

The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (_E.g._,
1_16 and 1_17: "Lord" and "Wielder of Glory"; 1_30, 1_31, 1_32; 2_12 and
2_13; 2_27 and 2_28; 3_5 and 3_6.) Occasionally, some loss has been
sustained; but, on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.

The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the
translation. All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have
been avoided. Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are
none, it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry.

[ix]

With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline of
the story of the poem.


_THE STORY._

_Hrothgar, king of the Danes, or Scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, or
palace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents.
The joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration. Grendel, the
monster, is seized with hateful jealousy. He cannot brook the sounds of
joyance that reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. Oft and
anon he goes to the joyous building, bent on direful mischief. Thane after
thane is ruthlessly carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong
enough and bold enough to cope with the monster. For twelve years he
persecutes Hrothgar and his vassals._

_Over sea, a day's voyage off, Beowulf, of the Geats, nephew of Higelac,
king of the Geats, hears of Grendel's doings and of Hrothgar's misery. He
resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. With
fourteen chosen companions, he sets sail for Dane-land. Reaching that
country, he soon persuades Hrothgar of his ability to help him. The hours
that elapse before night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. When
Hrothgar's bedtime comes he leaves the hall in charge of Beowulf, telling
him that never before has he given to another the absolute wardship of his
palace. All retire to rest, Beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms._

_Grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing God's anger. He seizes
and kills one of the sleeping warriors. Then he advances towards Beowulf.
A fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. No arms are used,
both combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. Beowulf tears
Grendel's shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den,
howling and yelling with agony and fury. The wound is fatal._

_The next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall
Heorot, to hear the news. Joy is boundless. Glee runs high. Hrothgar and
his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts._

_Grendel's mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. She
is furious and raging. While Beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart
[x] from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of Hrothgar's
favorite counsellors, and carries him off and devours him. Beowulf is
called. Determined to leave Heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and
goes down to look for the female monster. After traveling through the
waters many hours, he meets her near the sea-bottom. She drags him to her
den. There he sees Grendel lying dead. After a desperate and almost fatal
struggle with the woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking
with him Grendel's head._

_Joy is renewed at Heorot. Congratulations crowd upon the victor. Hrothgar
literally pours treasures into the lap of Beowulf; and it is agreed among
the vassals of the king that Beowulf will be their next liegelord._

_Beowulf leaves Dane-land. Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure._

_When the hero arrives in his own land, Higelac treats him as a
distinguished guest. He is the hero of the hour._

_Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the Geats. After he
has been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried
by a fire-spewing dragon. Beowulf determines to kill him. In the ensuing
struggle both Beowulf and the dragon are slain. The grief of the Geats is
inexpressible. They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor
the memory of their lord. A great funeral-pyre is built, and his body is
burnt. Then a memorial-barrow is made, visible from a great distance, that
sailors afar may be constantly reminded of the prowess of the national
hero of Geatland._

_The poem closes with a glowing tribute to his bravery, his gentleness,
his goodness of heart, and his generosity._

       *       *       *       *       *

It is the devout desire of this translator to hasten the day when the
story of Beowulf shall be as familiar to English-speaking peoples as that
of the Iliad. Beowulf is our first great epic. It is an epitomized history
of the life of the Teutonic races. It brings vividly before us our
forefathers of pre-Alfredian eras, in their love of war, of sea, and of
adventure.

My special thanks are due to Professors Francis A. March and James A.
Harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.

                                                        J.L. HALL.

[xi]




ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTES.


B. = Bugge. C. = Cosijn. Gr. = Grein. Grdvtg. = Grundtvig. H. = Heyne. H.
and S. = Harrison and Sharp. H.-So. = Heyne-Socin. K.= Kemble. Kl. =
Kluge. M.= Müllenhoff. R. = Rieger. S. = Sievers. Sw. = Sweet. t.B. = ten
Brink. Th. = Thorpe. W. = Wülcker.

       *       *       *       *       *




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TRANSLATIONS.


~Arnold, Thomas.~--Beowulf. A heroic poem of the eighth century. London,
1876. With English translation. Prose.

~Botkine, L.~--Beowulf. Epopée Anglo-Saxonne. Havre, 1877. First French
translation. Passages occasionally omitted.

~Conybeare, J.J.~--Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry. London, 1826. Full
Latin translation, and some passages translated into English blank-verse.

~Ettmuller, L.~--Beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt. Zürich, 1840.

~Garnett, J.M.~--Beowulf: an Anglo-Saxon Poem, and the Fight at Finnsburg.
Boston, 1882. An accurate line-for-line translation, using alliteration
occasionally, and sometimes assuming a metrical cadence.

~Grein, C.W.M.~--Dichtungen der Angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt. 2
Bde. Göttingen, 1857-59.

~Grion, Giusto.~--Beovulf, poema epico anglo-sassone del VII. secolo,
tradotto e illustrato. Lucca, 1883. First Italian translation.

~Grundtvig, N.F.S.~--Bjowulfs Drape. Copenhagen, 1820.

~Heyne, M.~--A translation in iambic measures. Paderborn, 1863.

~Kemble, J.M.~--The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Traveller's Song,
and the Battle of Finnsburg. London, 1833. The second edition contains a
prose translation of Beowulf.

~Leo, H.~--Ueber Beowulf. Halle, 1839. Translations of extracts.

[xii]

~Lumsden, H.W.~--Beowulf, translated into modern rhymes. London, 1881.
Ballad measures. Passages occasionally omitted.

~Sandras, G.S.~--De carminibus Cædmoni adjudicatis. Paris, 1859. An
extract from Beowulf, with Latin translation.

~Schaldmose, F.~--Beowulf og Scopes Widsith, to Angelsaxiske Digte.
Copenhagen, 1847.

~Simrock, K.~--Beowulf. Uebersetzt und erläutert. Stuttgart und Augsburg,
1859. Alliterative measures.

~Thorkelin, G.J.~--De Danorum rebus gestis secul. III. et IV. poema
Danicum dialecto Anglosaxonica. Havniæ, 1815. Latin translation.

~Thorpe, B.~--The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Scôp or Gleeman's
Tale, and the Fight at Finnsburg. Oxford, 1855. English translation in
short lines, generally containing two stresses.

~Wackerbarth, A.D.~--Beowulf, translated into English verse. London, 1849.

~Wickberg, R.~--Beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt. Westervik.
First Swedish translation.

~von Wolzogen, H.~--Beowulf, in alliterative measures. Leipzig.

~Zinsser, G.~--Der Kampf Beowulfs mit Grendel. Jahresbericht of the
Realschule at Forbach, 1881.

[xiii]




GLOSSARY OF PROPER NAMES.

       *       *       *       *       *

[The figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective
names occur. The large figures refer to fitts, the small, to lines in the
fitts.]

       *       *       *       *       *

~Ælfhere~.--A kinsman of Wiglaf.--36_3.

~Æschere~.--Confidential friend of King Hrothgar. Elder brother of
Yrmenlaf. Killed by Grendel.--21_3; 30_89.

~Beanstan~.--Father of Breca.--9_26.

~Beowulf~.--Son of Scyld, the founder of the dynasty of Scyldings. Father
of Healfdene, and grandfather of Hrothgar.--1_18; 2_1.

~Beowulf~.--The hero of the poem. Sprung from the stock of Geats, son of
Ecgtheow. Brought up by his maternal grandfather Hrethel, and figuring in
manhood as a devoted liegeman of his uncle Higelac. A hero from his youth.
Has the strength of thirty men. Engages in a swimming-match with Breca.
Goes to the help of Hrothgar against the monster Grendel. Vanquishes
Grendel and his mother. Afterwards becomes king of the Geats. Late in life
attempts to kill a fire-spewing dragon, and is slain. Is buried with great
honors. His memorial mound.--6_26; 7_2; 7_9; 9_3; 9_8; 12_28; 12_43; 23_1,
etc.

~Breca~.--Beowulf's opponent in the famous swimming-match.--9_8; 9_19;
9_21; 9_22.

~Brondings~.--A people ruled by Breca.--9_23.

~Brosinga mene~.--A famous collar once owned by the Brosings.--19_7.

~Cain~.--Progenitor of Grendel and other monsters.--2_56; 20_11.

~Dæghrefn~.--A warrior of the Hugs, killed by Beowulf.--35_40.

~Danes~.--Subjects of Scyld and his descendants, and hence often called
Scyldings. Other names for them are Victory-Scyldings, Honor-Scyldings,
Armor-Danes, Bright-Danes, East-Danes, West-Danes, North-Danes,
South-Danes, Ingwins, Hrethmen.--1_1; 2_1; 3_2; 5_14; 7_1, etc.

~Ecglaf~.--Father of Unferth, who taunts Beowulf.--9_1.

~Ecgtheow~.--Father of Beowulf, the hero of the poem. A widely-known
Wægmunding warrior. Marries Hrethel's daughter. After slaying Heatholaf, a
Wylfing, he flees his country.--7_3; 5_6; 8_4.

~Ecgwela~.--A king of the Danes before Scyld.--25_60.

[xiv]

~Elan~.--Sister of Hrothgar, and probably wife of Ongentheow, king of the
Swedes.--2_10.

~Eagle Cape~.--A promontory in Geat-land, under which took place Beowulf's
last encounter.--41_87.

~Eadgils~.--Son of Ohthere and brother of Eanmund.--34_2.

~Eanmund~.--Son of Ohthere and brother of Eadgils. The reference to these
brothers is vague, and variously understood. Heyne supposes as follows:
Raising a revolt against their father, they are obliged to leave Sweden.
They go to the land of the Geats; with what intention, is not known, but
probably to conquer and plunder. The Geatish king, Heardred, is slain by
one of the brothers, probably Eanmund.--36_10; 31_54 to 31_60; 33_66 to
34_6.

~Eofor~.--A Geatish hero who slays Ongentheow in war, and is rewarded by
Hygelac with the hand of his only daughter.--41_18; 41_48.

~Eormenric~.--A Gothic king, from whom Hama took away the famous Brosinga
mene.--19_9.

~Eomær~.--Son of Offa and Thrytho, king and queen of the Angles.--28_69.

~Finn~.--King of the North-Frisians and the Jutes. Marries Hildeburg. At
his court takes place the horrible slaughter in which the Danish general,
Hnæf, fell. Later on, Finn himself is slain by Danish warriors.--17_18;
17_30; 17_44; 18_4; 18_23.

~Fin-land~.--The country to which Beowulf was driven by the currents in
his swimming-match.--10_22.

~Fitela~.--Son and nephew of King Sigemund, whose praises are sung in
XIV.--14_42; 14_53.

~Folcwalda~.--Father of Finn.--17_38.

~Franks~.--Introduced occasionally in referring to the death of
Higelac.--19_19; 40_21; 40_24.

~Frisians~.--A part of them are ruled by Finn. Some of them were engaged
in the struggle in which Higelac was slain.--17_20; 17_42; 17_52; 40_21.

~Freaware~.--Daughter of King Hrothgar. Married to Ingeld, a Heathobard
prince.--29_60; 30_32.

~Froda~.--King of the Heathobards, and father of Ingeld.--29_62.

~Garmund~.--Father of Offa.--28_71.

~Geats, Geatmen~.--The race to which the hero of the poem belongs. Also
called Weder-Geats, or Weders, War-Geats, Sea-Geats. They are ruled by
Hrethel, Hæthcyn, Higelac, and Beowulf.--4_7; 7_4; 10_45; 11_8; 27_14;
28_8.

~Gepids~.--Named in connection with the Danes and Swedes.--35_34.

~Grendel~.--A monster of the race of Cain. Dwells in the fens and moors.
Is furiously envious when he hears sounds of joy in Hrothgar's palace.
Causes the king untold agony for years. Is finally conquered by Beowulf,
and dies of his wound. His hand and arm are hung up in Hrothgar's hall
Heorot. His head is cut off by Beowulf when he goes down to fight with
Grendel's mother.--2_50; 3_1; 3_13; 8_19; 11_17; 12_2; 13_27; 15_3.

~Guthlaf~.--A Dane of Hnæf's party.--18_24.

~Half-Danes~.--Branch of the Danes to which Hnæf belonged.--17_19.

[xv]

~Halga~.--Surnamed the Good. Younger brother of Hrothgar.--2_9.

~Hama~.--Takes the Brosinga mene from Eormenric.--19_7.

~Hæreth~.--Father of Higelac's queen, Hygd.--28_39; 29_18.

~Hæthcyn~.--Son of Hrethel and brother of Higelac. Kills his brother
Herebeald accidentally. Is slain at Ravenswood, fighting against
Ongentheow.--34_43; 35_23; 40_32.

~Helmings~.--The race to which Queen Wealhtheow belonged.--10_63.

~Heming~.--A kinsman of Garmund, perhaps nephew.--28_54; 28_70.

~Hengest~.--A Danish leader. Takes command on the fall of Hnæf.--17_33;
17_41.

~Herebeald~.--Eldest son of Hrethel, the Geatish king, and brother of
Higelac. Killed by his younger brother Hæthcyn.--34_43; 34_47.

~Heremod~.--A Danish king of a dynasty before the Scylding line. Was a
source of great sorrow to his people.--14_64; 25_59.

~Hereric~.--Referred to as uncle of Heardred, but otherwise
unknown.--31_60.

~Hetwars~.--Another name for the Franks.--33_51.

~Healfdene~.--Grandson of Scyld and father of Hrothgar. Ruled the Danes
long and well.--2_5; 4_1; 8_14.

~Heardred~.--Son of Higelac and Hygd, king and queen of the Geats.
Succeeds his father, with Beowulf as regent. Is slain by the sons of
Ohthere.--31_56; 33_63; 33_75.

~Heathobards~.--Race of Lombards, of which Froda is king. After Froda
falls in battle with the Danes, Ingeld, his son, marries Hrothgar's
daughter, Freaware, in order to heal the feud.--30_1; 30_6.

~Heatholaf~.--A Wylfing warrior slain by Beowulf's father.--8_5.

~Heathoremes~.--The people on whose shores Breca is cast by the waves
during his contest with Beowulf.--9_21.

~Heorogar~.--Elder brother of Hrothgar, and surnamed 'Weoroda Ræswa,'
Prince of the Troopers.--2_9; 8_12.

~Hereward~.--Son of the above.--31_17.

~Heort~, ~Heorot~.--The great mead-hall which King Hrothgar builds. It is
invaded by Grendel for twelve years. Finally cleansed by Beowulf, the
Geat. It is called Heort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate
it.--2_25; 3_32; 3_52.

~Hildeburg~.--Wife of Finn, daughter of Hoce, and related to
Hnæf,--probably his sister.--17_21; 18_34.

~Hnæf~.--Leader of a branch of the Danes called Half-Danes. Killed in the
struggle at Finn's castle.--17_19; 17_61.

~Hondscio~.--One of Beowulf's companions. Killed by Grendel just before
Beowulf grappled with that monster.--30_43.

~Hoce~.--Father of Hildeburg and probably of Hnæf.--17_26.

~Hrethel~.--King of the Geats, father of Higelac, and grandfather of
Beowulf.--7_4; 34_39.

~Hrethla~.--Once used for Hrethel.--7_82.

~Hrethmen~.--Another name for the Danes.--7_73.

~Hrethric~.--Son of Hrothgar.--18_65; 27_19.

[xvi]

~Hreosna-beorh~.--A promontory in Geat-land, near which Ohthere's sons
made plundering raids.--35_18.

~Hrothgar~.--The Danish king who built the hall Heort, but was long unable
to enjoy it on account of Grendel's persecutions. Marries Wealhtheow, a
Helming lady. Has two sons and a daughter. Is a typical Teutonic king,
lavish of gifts. A devoted liegelord, as his lamentations over slain
liegemen prove. Also very appreciative of kindness, as is shown by his
loving gratitude to Beowulf.--2_9; 2_12; 4_1; 8_10; 15_1; etc., etc.

~Hrothmund~.--Son of Hrothgar.--18_65.

~Hrothulf~.--Probably a son of Halga, younger brother of Hrothgar.
Certainly on terms of close intimacy in Hrothgar's palace.--16_26; 18_57.

~Hrunting~.--Unferth's sword, lent to Beowulf.--22_71; 25_9.

~Hugs~.--A race in alliance with the Franks and Frisians at the time of
Higelac's fall.--35_41.

~Hun~.--A Frisian warrior, probably general of the Hetwars. Gives Hengest
a beautiful sword.--18_19.

~Hunferth~.--Sometimes used for Unferth.

~Hygelac~, ~Higelac~.--King of the Geats, uncle and liegelord of Beowulf,
the hero of the poem.--His second wife is the lovely Hygd, daughter of
Hæreth. The son of their union is Heardred. Is slain in a war with the
Hugs, Franks, and Frisians combined. Beowulf is regent, and afterwards
king of the Geats.--4_6; 5_4; 28_34; 29_9; 29_21; 31_56.

~Hygd~.--Wife of Higelac, and daughter of Hæreth. There are some
indications that she married Beowulf after she became a widow.--28_37.

~Ingeld~.--Son of the Heathobard king, Froda. Marries Hrothgar's daughter,
Freaware, in order to reconcile the two peoples.--29_62; 30_32.

~Ingwins~.--Another name for the Danes.--16_52; 20_69.

~Jutes~.--Name sometimes applied to Finn's people.--17_22; 17_38; 18_17.

~Lafing~.--Name of a famous sword presented to Hengest by Hun.--18_19.

~Merewing~.--A Frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which Higelac
was slain.--40_29.

~Nægling~.--Beowulf's sword.--36_76.

~Offa~.--King of the Angles, and son of Garmund. Marries the terrible
Thrytho who is so strongly contrasted with Hygd.--28_59; 28_66.

~Ohthere~.--Son of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes. He is father of Eanmund
and Eadgils.--40_35; 40_39.

~Onela~.--Brother of Ohthere.--36_15; 40_39.

~Ongentheow~.--King of Sweden, of the Scylfing dynasty. Married, perhaps,
Elan, daughter of Healfdene.--35_26; 41_16.

~Oslaf~.--A Dane of Hnæf's party.--18_24.

~Ravenswood~.--The forest near which Hæthcyn was slain.--40_31; 40_41.

~Scefing~.--Applied (1_4) to Scyld, and meaning 'son of Scef.'

[xvii]

~Scyld~.--Founder of the dynasty to which Hrothgar, his father, and
grandfather belonged. He dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set
adrift. He goes from Daneland just as he had come to it--in a bark.--1_4;
1_19; 1_27.

~Scyldings~.--The descendants of Scyld. They are also called
Honor-Scyldings, Victory-Scyldings, War-Scyldings, etc. (See 'Danes,'
above.)--2_1; 7_1; 8_1.

~Scylfings~.--A Swedish royal line to which Wiglaf belonged.--36_2.

~Sigemund~.--Son of Wæls, and uncle and father of Fitela. His struggle
with a dragon is related in connection with Beowulf's deeds of
prowess.--14_38; 14_47.

~Swerting~.--Grandfather of Higelac, and father of Hrethel.--19_11.

~Swedes~.--People of Sweden, ruled by the Scylfings.--35_13.

~Thrytho~.--Wife of Offa, king of the Angles. Known for her fierce and
unwomanly disposition. She is introduced as a contrast to the gentle Hygd,
queen of Higelac.--28_42; 28_56.

~Unferth~.--Son of Ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of
Hrothgar. Taunts Beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match.
Lends Beowulf his sword when he goes to look for Grendel's mother. In the
MS. sometimes written _Hunferth_. 9_1; 18_41.

~Wæls~.--Father of Sigemund.--14_60.

~Wægmunding~.--A name occasionally applied to Wiglaf and Beowulf, and
perhaps derived from a common ancestor, Wægmund.--36_6; 38_61.

~Weders~.--Another name for Geats or Wedergeats.

~Wayland~.--A fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old
Teutonic literature.--7_83.

~Wendels~.--The people of Wulfgar, Hrothgar's messenger and retainer.
(Perhaps = Vandals.)--6_30.

~Wealhtheow~.--Wife of Hrothgar. Her queenly courtesy is well shown in the
poem.--10_55.

~Weohstan~, or ~Wihstan~.--A Wægmunding, and father of Wiglaf.--36_1.

~Whale's Ness~.--A prominent promontory, on which Beowulf's mound was
built.--38_52; 42_76.

~Wiglaf~.--Son of Wihstan, and related to Beowulf. He remains faithful to
Beowulf in the fatal struggle with the fire-drake. Would rather die than
leave his lord in his dire emergency.--36_1; 36_3; 36_28.

~Wonred~.--Father of Wulf and Eofor.--41_20; 41_26.

~Wulf~.--Son of Wonred. Engaged in the battle between Higelac's and
Ongentheow's forces, and had a hand-to-hand fight with Ongentheow himself.
Ongentheow disables him, and is thereupon slain by Eofor.--41_19; 41_29.

~Wulfgar~.--Lord of the Wendels, and retainer of Hrothgar.--6_18; 6_30.

~Wylfings~.--A people to whom belonged Heatholaf, who was slain by
Ecgtheow.--8_6; 8_16.

~Yrmenlaf~.--Younger brother of Æschere, the hero whose death grieved
Hrothgar so deeply.--21_4.

[xviii]




LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASES NOT IN GENERAL USE.


ATHELING.--Prince, nobleman.

BAIRN.--Son, child.

BARROW.--Mound, rounded hill, funeral-mound.

BATTLE-SARK.--Armor.

BEAKER.--Cup, drinking-vessel.

BEGEAR.--Prepare.

BIGHT.--Bay, sea.

BILL.--Sword.

BOSS.--Ornamental projection.

BRACTEATE.--A round ornament on a necklace.

BRAND.--Sword.

BURN.--Stream.

BURNIE.--Armor.

CARLE.--Man, hero.

EARL.--Nobleman, any brave man.

EKE.--Also.

EMPRISE.--Enterprise, undertaking.

ERST.--Formerly.

ERST-WORTHY.--Worthy for a long time past.

FAIN.--Glad.

FERRY.--Bear, carry.

FEY.--Fated, doomed.

FLOAT.--Vessel, ship.

FOIN.--To lunge (Shaks.).

GLORY OF KINGS.--God.

GREWSOME.--Cruel, fierce.

HEFT.--Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for 'sword.'

HELM.--Helmet, protector.

HENCHMAN.--Retainer, vassal.

HIGHT.--Am (was) named.

HOLM.--Ocean, curved surface of the sea.

HIMSEEMED.--(It) seemed to him.

LIEF.--Dear, valued.

MERE.--Sea; in compounds, 'mere-ways,' 'mere-currents,' etc.

MICKLE.--Much.

NATHLESS.--Nevertheless.

NAZE.--Edge (nose).

NESS.--Edge.

NICKER.--Sea-beast.

QUIT, QUITE.--Requite.

RATHE.--Quickly.

REAVE.--Bereave, deprive.

SAIL-ROAD.--Sea.

SETTLE.--Seat, bench.

SKINKER.--One who pours.

SOOTHLY.--Truly.

SWINGE.--Stroke, blow.

TARGE, TARGET.--Shield.

THROUGHLY.--Thoroughly.

TOLD.--Counted.

UNCANNY.--Ill-featured, grizzly.

UNNETHE.--Difficult.

WAR-SPEED.--Success in war.

WEB.--Tapestry (that which is 'woven').

WEEDED.--Clad (cf. widow's weeds).

WEEN.--Suppose, imagine.

WEIRD.--Fate, Providence.

WHILOM.--At times, formerly, often.

WIELDER.--Ruler. Often used of God; also in compounds, as 'Wielder of
Glory,' 'Wielder of Worship.'

WIGHT.--Creature.

WOLD.--Plane, extended surface.

WOT.--Knows.

YOUNKER.--Youth.

[1]




BEOWULF.




I.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF SCYLD.


{The famous race of Spear-Danes.}

          Lo! the Spear-Danes' glory through splendid achievements
          The folk-kings' former fame we have heard of,
          How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.

{Scyld, their mighty king, in honor of whom they are often called
Scyldings. He is the great-grandfather of Hrothgar, so prominent in the
poem.}

          Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers
        5 From many a people their mead-benches tore.
          Since first he found him friendless and wretched,
          The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,
          Waxed 'neath the welkin, world-honor gained,
          Till all his neighbors o'er sea were compelled to
       10 Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:
          An excellent atheling! After was borne him

{A son is born to him, who receives the name of Beowulf--a name afterwards
made so famous by the hero of the poem.}

          A son and heir, young in his dwelling,
          Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.
          He had marked the misery malice had caused them,
       15 [1]That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile[2]
          Long been afflicted. The Lord, in requital,
          Wielder of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.
          Famed was Beowulf, far spread the glory
          Of Scyld's great son in the lands of the Danemen.

[2]

{The ideal Teutonic king lavishes gifts on his vassals.}

       20 So the carle that is young, by kindnesses rendered
          The friends of his father, with fees in abundance
          Must be able to earn that when age approacheth
          Eager companions aid him requitingly,
          When war assaults him serve him as liegemen:
       25 By praise-worthy actions must honor be got
          'Mong all of the races. At the hour that was fated

{Scyld dies at the hour appointed by Fate.}

          Scyld then departed to the All-Father's keeping
          Warlike to wend him; away then they bare him
          To the flood of the current, his fond-loving comrades,
       30 As himself he had bidden, while the friend of the Scyldings
          Word-sway wielded, and the well-lovèd land-prince
          Long did rule them.[3] The ring-stemmèd vessel,
          Bark of the atheling, lay there at anchor,
          Icy in glimmer and eager for sailing;

{By his own request, his body is laid on a vessel and wafted seaward.}

       35 The belovèd leader laid they down there,
          Giver of rings, on the breast of the vessel,
          The famed by the mainmast. A many of jewels,
          Of fretted embossings, from far-lands brought over,
          Was placed near at hand then; and heard I not ever
       40 That a folk ever furnished a float more superbly
          With weapons of warfare, weeds for the battle,
          Bills and burnies; on his bosom sparkled
          Many a jewel that with him must travel
          On the flush of the flood afar on the current.
       45 And favors no fewer they furnished him soothly,
          Excellent folk-gems, than others had given him

{He leaves Daneland on the breast of a bark.}

          Who when first he was born outward did send him
          Lone on the main, the merest of infants:
          And a gold-fashioned standard they stretched under heaven
[3]    50 High o'er his head, let the holm-currents bear him,
          Seaward consigned him: sad was their spirit,
          Their mood very mournful. Men are not able

{No one knows whither the boat drifted.}

          Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,[4]
          Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied.

    [1] For the 'Þæt' of verse 15, Sievers suggests 'Þá' (= which). If
    this be accepted, the sentence 'He had ... afflicted' will read: _He_
    (_i.e._ God) _had perceived the malice-caused sorrow which they,
    lordless, had formerly long endured_.

    [2] For 'aldor-léase' (15) Gr. suggested 'aldor-ceare': _He perceived
    their distress, that they formerly had suffered life-sorrow a long
    while_.

    [3] A very difficult passage. 'Áhte' (31) has no object. H. supplies
    'geweald' from the context; and our translation is based upon this
    assumption, though it is far from satisfactory. Kl. suggests
    'lændagas' for 'lange': _And the beloved land-prince enjoyed (had) his
    transitory days (i.e. lived)_. B. suggests a dislocation; but this is
    a dangerous doctrine, pushed rather far by that eminent scholar.

    [4] The reading of the H.-So. text has been quite closely followed;
    but some eminent scholars read 'séle-rædenne' for 'sele-rædende.' If
    that be adopted, the passage will read: _Men cannot tell us, indeed,
    the order of Fate, etc._ 'Sele-rædende' has two things to support it:
    (1) v. 1347; (2) it affords a parallel to 'men' in v. 50.




II.

SCYLD'S SUCCESSORS.--HROTHGAR'S GREAT MEAD-HALL.


{Beowulf succeeds his father Scyld}

          In the boroughs then Beowulf, bairn of the Scyldings,
          Belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting season
          Was famed mid the folk (his father departed,
          The prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang
        5 Great-minded Healfdene; the Danes in his lifetime
          He graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.

{Healfdene's birth.}

          Four bairns of his body born in succession
          Woke in the world, war-troopers' leader
          Heorogar, Hrothgar, and Halga the good;
       10 Heard I that Elan was Ongentheow's consort,

{He has three sons--one of them, Hrothgar--and a daughter named Elan.
Hrothgar becomes a mighty king.}

          The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.
          Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given,
          Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmen
          Obeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood,
       15 A numerous band.  It burned in his spirit
          To urge his folk to found a great building,
          A mead-hall grander than men of the era

{He is eager to build a great hall in which he may feast his retainers}

          Ever had heard of, and in it to share
          With young and old all of the blessings
       20 The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.
          Then the work I find afar was assigned
[4]       To many races in middle-earth's regions,
          To adorn the great folk-hall. In due time it happened
          Early 'mong men, that 'twas finished entirely,
       25 The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named it

{The hall is completed, and is called Heort, or Heorot.}

          Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded 'mong earlmen.
          His promise he brake not, rings he lavished,
          Treasure at banquet. Towered the hall up
          High and horn-crested, huge between antlers:
       30 It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;
          Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath
          Arise for a woman's husband and father.
          Then the mighty war-spirit[1] endured for a season,

{The Monster Grendel is madly envious of the Danemen's joy.}

          Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,
       35 That light-hearted laughter loud in the building
          Greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,
          Clear song of the singer. He said that was able

{[The course of the story is interrupted by a short reference to some old
account of the creation.]}

          To tell from of old earthmen's beginnings,
          That Father Almighty earth had created,
       40 The winsome wold that the water encircleth,
          Set exultingly the sun's and the moon's beams
          To lavish their lustre on land-folk and races,
          And earth He embellished in all her regions
          With limbs and leaves; life He bestowed too
       45 On all the kindreds that live under heaven.

{The glee of the warriors is overcast by a horrible dread.}

          So blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,
          The warriors abided, till a certain one gan to
          Dog them with deeds of direfullest malice,
          A foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger[2]
       50 Was Grendel entitled, the march-stepper famous
          Who[3] dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;
          The wan-mooded being abode for a season
[5]       In the land of the giants, when the Lord and Creator
          Had banned him and branded. For that bitter murder,
       55 The killing of Abel, all-ruling Father

{Cain is referred to as a progenitor of Grendel, and of monsters in
general.}

          The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance;
          In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove him
          From kindred and kind, that crime to atone for,
          Meter of Justice. Thence ill-favored creatures,
       60 Elves and giants, monsters of ocean,
          Came into being, and the giants that longtime
          Grappled with God; He gave them requital.

    [1] R. and t. B. prefer 'ellor-gæst' to 'ellen-gæst' (86): _Then the
    stranger from afar endured, etc._

    [2] Some authorities would translate '_demon_' instead of
    '_stranger_.'

    [3] Some authorities arrange differently, and render: _Who dwelt in
    the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness, the land of the
    giant-race._




III.

GRENDEL THE MURDERER.


{Grendel attacks the sleeping heroes}

          When the sun was sunken, he set out to visit
          The lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used it
          For beds and benches when the banquet was over.
          Then he found there reposing many a noble
        5 Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,[1]
          Misery knew not. The monster of evil
          Greedy and cruel tarried but little,

{He drags off thirty of them, and devours them}

          Fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers
          Thirty of thanemen; thence he departed
       10 Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,
          With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.
          In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,
          Was Grendel's prowess revealed to the warriors:

{A cry of agony goes up, when Grendel's horrible deed is fully realized.}

          Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,
       15 Morning-cry mighty. The man-ruler famous,
          The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,
          Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,
[6]       When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,
          The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,

{The monster returns the next night.}

       20 Too loathsome and lasting. Not longer he tarried,
          But one night after continued his slaughter
          Shameless and shocking, shrinking but little
          From malice and murder; they mastered him fully.
          He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for
       25 A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges,
          A bed in the bowers. Then was brought to his notice
          Told him truly by token apparent
          The hall-thane's hatred: he held himself after
          Further and faster who the foeman did baffle.
       30 [2]So ruled he and strongly strove against justice
          Lone against all men, till empty uptowered

{King Hrothgar's agony and suspense last twelve years.}

          The choicest of houses. Long was the season:
          Twelve-winters' time torture suffered
          The friend of the Scyldings, every affliction,
       35 Endless agony; hence it after[3] became
          Certainly known to the children of men
          Sadly in measures, that long against Hrothgar
          Grendel struggled:--his grudges he cherished,
          Murderous malice, many a winter,
       40 Strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he
          [4]Life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all of
          The men of the Dane-folk, for money to settle,
          No counsellor needed count for a moment
[7]       On handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;

{Grendel is unremitting in his persecutions.}

       45 The monster of evil fiercely did harass,
          The ill-planning death-shade, both elder and younger,
          Trapping and tricking them. He trod every night then
          The mist-covered moor-fens; men do not know where
          Witches and wizards wander and ramble.
       50 So the foe of mankind many of evils
          Grievous injuries, often accomplished,
          Horrible hermit; Heort he frequented,
          Gem-bedecked palace, when night-shades had fallen

{God is against the monster.}

          (Since God did oppose him, not the throne could he touch,[5]
       55 The light-flashing jewel, love of Him knew not).
          'Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the Scyldings

{The king and his council deliberate in vain.}

          Soul-crushing sorrow. Not seldom in private
          Sat the king in his council; conference held they
          What the braves should determine 'gainst terrors unlooked for.

{They invoke the aid of their gods.}

       60 At the shrines of their idols often they promised
          Gifts and offerings, earnestly prayed they
          The devil from hell would help them to lighten
          Their people's oppression. Such practice they used then,
          Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered
       65 In innermost spirit, God they knew not,

{The true God they do not know.}

          Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler,
          No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven,
          The Wielder of Glory. Woe will be his who
          Through furious hatred his spirit shall drive to
       70 The clutch of the fire, no comfort shall look for,
          Wax no wiser; well for the man who,
          Living his life-days, his Lord may face
          And find defence in his Father's embrace!

    [1] The translation is based on 'weras,' adopted by H.-So.--K. and Th.
    read 'wera' and, arranging differently, render 119(2)-120: _They knew
    not sorrow, the wretchedness of man, aught of misfortune_.--For
    'unhælo' (120) R. suggests 'unfælo': _The uncanny creature, greedy and
    cruel, etc_.

    [2] S. rearranges and translates: _So he ruled and struggled unjustly,
    one against all, till the noblest of buildings stood useless (it was a
    long while) twelve years' time: the friend of the Scyldings suffered
    distress, every woe, great sorrows, etc_.

    [3] For 'syððan,' B. suggests 'sárcwidum': _Hence in mournful words it
    became well known, etc_. Various other words beginning with 's' have
    been conjectured.

    [4] The H.-So. glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this
    passage.--'Sibbe' (154), which H.-So. regards as an instr., B. takes
    as accus., obj. of 'wolde.' Putting a comma after Deniga, he renders:
    _He did not desire peace with any of the Danes, nor did he wish to
    remove their life-woe, nor to settle for money_.

    [5] Of this difficult passage the following interpretations among
    others are given: (1) Though Grendel has frequented Heorot as a demon,
    he could not become ruler of the Danes, on account of his hostility to
    God. (2) Hrothgar was much grieved that Grendel had not appeared
    before his throne to receive presents. (3) He was not permitted to
    devastate the hall, on account of the Creator; _i.e._ God wished to
    make his visit fatal to him.--Ne ... wisse (169) W. renders: _Nor had
    he any desire to do so_; 'his' being obj. gen. = danach.

[8]




IV.

BEOWULF GOES TO HROTHGAR'S ASSISTANCE.


{Hrothgar sees no way of escape from the persecutions of Grendel.}

          So Healfdene's kinsman constantly mused on
          His long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever
          Was not anywise able evils to 'scape from:
          Too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,
        5 Loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,

{Beowulf, the Geat, hero of the poem, hears of Hrothgar's sorrow, and
resolves to go to his assistance.}

          Greatest of night-woes. So Higelac's liegeman,
          Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel's achievements
          Heard in his home:[1] of heroes then living
          He was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble.
       10 He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty;
          He said he the war-king would seek o'er the ocean,
          The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.
          For the perilous project prudent companions
          Chided him little, though loving him dearly;
       15 They egged the brave atheling, augured him glory.

{With fourteen carefully chosen companions, he sets out for Dane-land.}

          The excellent knight from the folk of the Geatmen
          Had liegemen selected, likest to prove them
          Trustworthy warriors; with fourteen companions
          The vessel he looked for; a liegeman then showed them,
       20 A sea-crafty man, the bounds of the country.
          Fast the days fleeted; the float was a-water,
          The craft by the cliff. Clomb to the prow then
          Well-equipped warriors: the wave-currents twisted
          The sea on the sand; soldiers then carried
       25 On the breast of the vessel bright-shining jewels,
          Handsome war-armor; heroes outshoved then,
          Warmen the wood-ship, on its wished-for adventure.

[9]

{The vessel sails like a bird}

          The foamy-necked floater fanned by the breeze,
          Likest a bird, glided the waters,

{In twenty four hours they reach the shores of Hrothgar's dominions}

       30 Till twenty and four hours thereafter
          The twist-stemmed vessel had traveled such distance
          That the sailing-men saw the sloping embankments,
          The sea cliffs gleaming, precipitous mountains,
          Nesses enormous: they were nearing the limits
       35 At the end of the ocean.[2] Up thence quickly
          The men of the Weders clomb to the mainland,
          Fastened their vessel (battle weeds rattled,
          War burnies clattered), the Wielder they thanked
          That the ways o'er the waters had waxen so gentle.

{They are hailed by the Danish coast guard}

       40 Then well from the cliff edge the guard of the Scyldings
          Who the sea-cliffs should see to, saw o'er the gangway
          Brave ones bearing beauteous targets,
          Armor all ready, anxiously thought he,
          Musing and wondering what men were approaching.
       45 High on his horse then Hrothgar's retainer
          Turned him to coastward, mightily brandished
          His lance in his hands, questioned with boldness.

{His challenge}

          "Who are ye men here, mail-covered warriors
          Clad in your corslets, come thus a-driving
       50 A high riding ship o'er the shoals of the waters,
          [3]And hither 'neath helmets have hied o'er the ocean?
[10]      I have been strand-guard, standing as warden,
          Lest enemies ever anywise ravage
          Danish dominions with army of war-ships.
       55 More boldly never have warriors ventured
          Hither to come; of kinsmen's approval,
          Word-leave of warriors, I ween that ye surely

{He is struck by Beowulf's appearance.}

          Nothing have known. Never a greater one
          Of earls o'er the earth have _I_ had a sight of
       60 Than is one of your number, a hero in armor;
          No low-ranking fellow[4] adorned with his weapons,
          But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,
          And striking appearance. Ere ye pass on your journey
          As treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings
       65 And farther fare, I fully must know now
          What race ye belong to. Ye far-away dwellers,
          Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion
          Hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting
          Plainly to tell me what place ye are come from."

    [1] 'From hám' (194) is much disputed. One rendering is: _Beowulf,
    being away from home, heard of Hrothgar's troubles, etc_. Another,
    that adopted by S. and endorsed in the H.-So. notes, is: _B. heard
    from his neighborhood (neighbors),_ i.e. _in his home, etc_. A third
    is: _B., being at home, heard this as occurring away from home_. The
    H.-So. glossary and notes conflict.

    [2] 'Eoletes' (224) is marked with a (?) by H.-So.; our rendering
    simply follows his conjecture.--Other conjectures as to 'eolet' are:
    (1) _voyage_, (2) _toil_, _labor_, (3) _hasty journey_.

    [3] The lacuna of the MS at this point has been supplied by various
    conjectures. The reading adopted by H.-So. has been rendered in the
    above translation. W., like H.-So., makes 'ic' the beginning of a new
    sentence, but, for 'helmas bæron,' he reads 'hringed stefnan.' This
    has the advantage of giving a parallel to 'brontne ceol' instead of a
    kenning for 'go.'--B puts the (?) after 'holmas', and begins a new
    sentence at the middle of the line. Translate: _What warriors are ye,
    clad in armor, who have thus come bringing the foaming vessel over the
    water way, hither over the seas? For some time on the wall I have been
    coast guard, etc_. S. endorses most of what B. says, but leaves out
    'on the wall' in the last sentence. If W.'s 'hringed stefnan' be
    accepted, change line 51 above to, _A ring-stemmed vessel hither
    o'ersea_.

    [4] 'Seld-guma' (249) is variously rendered: (1) _housecarle_; (2)
    _home-stayer_; (3) _common man_. Dr. H. Wood suggests _a man-at-arms
    in another's house_.




V.

THE GEATS REACH HEOROT.


{Beowulf courteously replies.}

          The chief of the strangers rendered him answer,
          War-troopers' leader, and word-treasure opened:

{We are Geats.}

          "We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland,
          And Higelac's hearth-friends. To heroes unnumbered

{My father Ecgtheow was well-known in his day.}

        5 My father was known, a noble head-warrior
          Ecgtheow titled; many a winter
          He lived with the people, ere he passed on his journey,
          Old from his dwelling; each of the counsellors
          Widely mid world-folk well remembers him.

{Our intentions towards King Hrothgar are of the kindest.}

       10 We, kindly of spirit, the lord of thy people,
          The son of King Healfdene, have come here to visit,
[11]      Folk-troop's defender: be free in thy counsels!
          To the noble one bear we a weighty commission,
          The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween,

{Is it true that a monster is slaying Danish heroes?}

       15 Naught of our message. Thou know'st if it happen,
          As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler,
          Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murky
          By deeds very direful 'mid the Danemen exhibits
          Hatred unheard of, horrid destruction
       20 And the falling of dead. From feelings least selfish

{I can help your king to free himself from this horrible creature.}

          I am able to render counsel to Hrothgar,
          How he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,
          If the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,[1]
          Comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,
       25 Or ever hereafter he agony suffer
          And troublous distress, while towereth upward
          The handsomest of houses high on the summit."

{The coast-guard reminds Beowulf that it is easier to say than to do.}

          Bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,
          The doughty retainer: "The difference surely
       30 'Twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearer
          Who judgeth wisely well shall determine.
          This band, I hear, beareth no malice

{I am satisfied of your good intentions, and shall lead you to the
palace.}

          To the prince of the Scyldings. Pass ye then onward
          With weapons and armor. I shall lead you in person;
       35 To my war-trusty vassals command I shall issue
          To keep from all injury your excellent vessel,

{Your boat shall be well cared for during your stay here.}

          Your fresh-tarred craft, 'gainst every opposer
          Close by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shall
          Waft back again the well-beloved hero
       40 O'er the way of the water to Weder dominions.

{He again compliments Beowulf.}

          To warrior so great 'twill be granted sure
          In the storm of strife to stand secure."
          Onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,
          The broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,
[12]   45 Firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened[2]
          Bright on the visors vivid with gilding,
          Blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.
          The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,

{The land is perhaps rolling.}

          Descended together, till they saw the great palace,
       50 The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming:

{Heorot flashes on their view.}

          'Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputed
          Of halls under heaven which the hero abode in;
          Its lustre enlightened lands without number.
          Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering
       55 Court of the bold ones, that they easily thither
          Might fare on their journey; the aforementioned warrior
          Turning his courser, quoth as he left them:

{The coast-guard, having discharged his duty, bids them God-speed.}

          "'Tis time I were faring; Father Almighty
          Grant you His grace, and give you to journey
       60 Safe on your mission! To the sea I will get me
          'Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand."

    [1] 'Edwendan' (280) B. takes to be the subs. 'edwenden' (cf. 1775);
    and 'bisigu' he takes as gen. sing., limiting 'edwenden': _If
    reparation for sorrows is ever to come_. This is supported by t.B.

    [2] Combining the emendations of B. and t.B., we may read: _The
    boar-images glistened ... brilliant, protected the life of the
    war-mooded man_. They read 'ferh-wearde' (305) and 'gúðmódgum men'
    (306).




VI.

BEOWULF INTRODUCES HIMSELF AT THE PALACE.


          The highway glistened with many-hued pebble,
          A by-path led the liegemen together.
          [1]Firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,
          The ring-sword radiant rang 'mid the armor
        5 As the party was approaching the palace together

{They set their arms and armor against the wall.}

          In warlike equipments. 'Gainst the wall of the building
          Their wide-fashioned war-shields they weary did set then,
[13]      Battle-shields sturdy; benchward they turned then;
          Their battle-sarks rattled, the gear of the heroes;
       10 The lances stood up then, all in a cluster,
          The arms of the seamen, ashen-shafts mounted
          With edges of iron: the armor-clad troopers

{A Danish hero asks them whence and why they are come.}

          Were decked with weapons. Then a proud-mooded hero
          Asked of the champions questions of lineage:
       15 "From what borders bear ye your battle-shields plated,
          Gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,
          Helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?--
          To Hrothgar the king I am servant and liegeman.
          'Mong folk from far-lands found I have never

{He expresses no little admiration for the strangers.}

       20 Men so many of mien more courageous.
          I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,
          But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar."

{Beowulf replies.}

          Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,
          The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question,

{We are Higelac's table-companions, and bear an important commission to
your prince.}

       25 Hardy 'neath helmet: "Higelac's mates are we;
          Beowulf hight I. To the bairn of Healfdene,
          The famous folk-leader, I freely will tell
          To thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearing
          He'll grant we may greet him so gracious to all men."
       30 Wulfgar replied then (he was prince of the Wendels,
          His boldness of spirit was known unto many,
          His prowess and prudence): "The prince of the Scyldings,

{Wulfgar, the thane, says that he will go and ask Hrothgar whether he will
see the strangers.}

          The friend-lord of Danemen, I will ask of thy journey,
          The giver of rings, as thou urgest me do it,
       35 The folk-chief famous, and inform thee early
          What answer the good one mindeth to render me."
          He turned then hurriedly where Hrothgar was sitting,
          [2]Old and hoary, his earlmen attending him;
          The strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder
       40 Of the lord of the Danemen, of courteous thanemen
          The custom he minded. Wulfgar addressed then
          His friendly liegelord: "Folk of the Geatmen

[14]

{He thereupon urges his liegelord to receive the visitors courteously.}

          O'er the way of the waters are wafted hither,
          Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank
       45 The battle-champions Beowulf title.
          They make this petition: with thee, O my chieftain,
          To be granted a conference; O gracious King Hrothgar,
          Friendly answer refuse not to give them!

{Hrothgar, too, is struck with Beowulf's appearance.}

          In war-trappings weeded worthy they seem
       50 Of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughty
          Who headed the heroes hitherward coming."

    [1] Instead of the punctuation given by H.-So, S. proposed to insert a
    comma after 'scír' (322), and to take 'hring-íren' as meaning
    'ring-mail' and as parallel with 'gúð-byrne.' The passage would then
    read: _The firm and hand-locked war-burnie shone, bright ring-mail,
    rang 'mid the armor, etc_.

    [2] Gr. and others translate 'unhár' by 'bald'; _old and bald_.




VII.

HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.


{Hrothgar remembers Beowulf as a youth, and also remembers his father.}

          Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings:
          "I remember this man as the merest of striplings.
          His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled,
          Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his
        5 One only daughter; his battle-brave son
          Is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.
          Seafaring sailors asserted it then,

{Beowulf is reported to have the strength of thirty men.}

          Who valuable gift-gems of the Geatmen[1] carried
          As peace-offering thither, that he thirty men's grapple
       10 Has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.

{God hath sent him to our rescue.}

          The holy Creator usward sent him,
          To West-Dane warriors, I ween, for to render
          'Gainst Grendel's grimness gracious assistance:
          I shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.
       15 Hasten to bid them hither to speed them,[2]
          To see assembled this circle of kinsmen;
          Tell them expressly they're welcome in sooth to
          The men of the Danes." To the door of the building

[15]

{Wulfgar invites the strangers in.}

          Wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:
       20 "My victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,
          The East-Danes' atheling, that your origin knows he,
          And o'er wave-billows wafted ye welcome are hither,
          Valiant of spirit. Ye straightway may enter
          Clad in corslets, cased in your helmets,
       25 To see King Hrothgar. Here let your battle-boards,
          Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring."
          The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,
          An excellent thane-group; some there did await them,
          And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.
       30 Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,
          'Neath Heorot's roof; the high-minded went then
          Sturdy 'neath helmet till he stood in the building.
          Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,
          His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):

{Beowulf salutes Hrothgar, and then proceeds to boast of his youthful
achievements.}

       35 "Hail thou, Hrothgar! I am Higelac's kinsman
          And vassal forsooth; many a wonder
          I dared as a stripling. The doings of Grendel,
          In far-off fatherland I fully did know of:
          Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,
       40 Excellent edifice, empty and useless
          To all the earlmen after evenlight's glimmer
          'Neath heaven's bright hues hath hidden its glory.
          This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,
          Carles very clever, to come and assist thee,
       45 Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew of

{His fight with the nickers.}

          The strength of my body. Themselves they beheld me
          When I came from the contest, when covered with gore
          Foes I escaped from, where five[3] I had bound,
[16]      The giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying
       50 The nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,
          The Weders avenged (woes had they suffered)
          Enemies ravaged; alone now with Grendel

{He intends to fight Grendel unaided.}

          I shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,
          The giant, decide it. Thee I would therefore
       55 Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain,
          Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition:
          Not to refuse me, defender of warriors,
          Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee,
          That _I_ may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,
       60 This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.
          I have heard on inquiry, the horrible creature

{Since the monster uses no weapons,}

          From veriest rashness recks not for weapons;
          I this do scorn then, so be Higelac gracious,
          My liegelord belovèd, lenient of spirit,
       65 To bear a blade or a broad-fashioned target,
          A shield to the onset; only with hand-grip

{I, too, shall disdain to use any.}

          The foe I must grapple, fight for my life then,
          Foeman with foeman; he fain must rely on
          The doom of the Lord whom death layeth hold of.

{Should he crush me, he will eat my companions as he has eaten thy
thanes.}

       70 I ween he will wish, if he win in the struggle,
          To eat in the war-hall earls of the Geat-folk,
          Boldly to swallow[4] them, as of yore he did often
          The best of the Hrethmen! Thou needest not trouble
          A head-watch to give me;[5] he will have me dripping

[17]

{In case of my defeat, thou wilt not have the trouble of burying me.}

       75 And dreary with gore, if death overtake me,[6]
          Will bear me off bleeding, biting and mouthing me,
          The hermit will eat me, heedless of pity,
          Marking the moor-fens; no more wilt thou need then

{Should I fall, send my armor to my lord, King Higelac.}

          Find me my food.[7] If I fall in the battle,
       80 Send to Higelac the armor that serveth
          To shield my bosom, the best of equipments,
          Richest of ring-mails; 'tis the relic of Hrethla,

{Weird is supreme}

          The work of Wayland. Goes Weird as she must go!"

    [1] Some render 'gif-sceattas' by 'tribute.'--'Géata' B. and Th.
    emended to 'Géatum.' If this be accepted, change '_of_ the Geatmen' to
    '_to_ the Geatmen.'

    [2] If t.B.'s emendation of vv. 386, 387 be accepted, the two lines,
    'Hasten ... kinsmen' will read: _Hasten thou, bid the throng of
    kinsmen go into the hall together_.

    [3] For 420 (_b_) and 421 (_a_), B. suggests: Þær ic (on) fífelgeban
    ýðde eotena cyn = _where I in the ocean destroyed the
    eoten-race_.--t.B. accepts B.'s "brilliant" 'fífelgeban,' omits 'on,'
    emends 'cyn' to 'hám,' arranging: Þær ic fífelgeban ýðde, eotena hám =
    _where I desolated the ocean, the home of the eotens_.--This would be
    better but for changing 'cyn' to 'hám.'--I suggest: Þær ic fífelgeband
    (cf. nhd. Bande) ýðde, eotena cyn = _where I conquered the monster
    band, the race of the eotens_. This makes no change except to read
    '_fífel_' for '_fífe_.'

    [4] 'Unforhte' (444) is much disputed.--H.-So. wavers between adj. and
    adv. Gr. and B. take it as an adv. modifying _etan: Will eat the Geats
    fearlessly_.--Kl. considers this reading absurd, and proposes
    'anforhte' = timid.--Understanding 'unforhte' as an adj. has this
    advantage, viz. that it gives a parallel to 'Geátena leóde': but to
    take it as an adv. is more natural. Furthermore, to call the Geats
    'brave' might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at the
    Danes, so long helpless; while to call his own men 'timid' would be
    befouling his own nest.

    [5] For 'head-watch,' cf. H.-So. notes and cf. v. 2910.--Th.
    translates: _Thou wilt not need my head to hide_ (i.e., thou wilt have
    no occasion to bury me, as Grendel will devour me whole).--Simrock
    imagines a kind of dead-watch.--Dr. H. Wood suggests: _Thou wilt not
    have to bury so much as my head_ (for Grendel will be a thorough
    undertaker),--grim humor.

    [6] S. proposes a colon after 'nimeð' (l. 447). This would make no
    essential change in the translation.

    [7] Owing to the vagueness of 'feorme' (451), this passage is
    variously translated. In our translation, H.-So.'s glossary has been
    quite closely followed. This agrees substantially with B.'s
    translation (P. and B. XII. 87). R. translates: _Thou needst not take
    care longer as to the consumption of my dead body._ 'Líc' is also a
    crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.




VIII.

HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.--_Continued_.


{Hrothgar responds.}

          Hrothgar discoursed, helm of the Scyldings:
          "To defend our folk and to furnish assistance,[1]
          Thou soughtest us hither, good friend Beowulf.

{Reminiscences of Beowulf's father, Ecgtheow.}

          The fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,
        5 Heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict
          'Mid Wilfingish warriors; then the Wederish people
          For fear of a feud were forced to disown him.
          Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes,
[18]      The race of the Scyldings, o'er the roll of the waters;
       10 I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen,
          The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,
          Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar,
          My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,
          Healfdene his bairn. He was better than I am!
       15 That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded;
          O'er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sent
          Ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.

{Hrothgar recounts to Beowulf the horrors of Grendel's persecutions.}

          It pains me in spirit to any to tell it,
          What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me,
       20 What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.
          Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;
          Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.
          God can easily hinder the scather
          From deeds so direful. Oft drunken with beer

{My thanes have made many boasts, but have not executed them.}

       25 O'er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armor
          They would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches
          A grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.
          Then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,
          The building was bloody at breaking of daylight,
       30 The bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,
          The folk-hall was gory: I had fewer retainers,
          Dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.

{Sit down to the feast, and give us comfort.}

          Sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,[2]
          Thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!"

{A bench is made ready for Beowulf and his party.}

       35 For the men of the Geats then together assembled,
          In the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;
          There warlike in spirit they went to be seated,
          Proud and exultant. A liegeman did service,
[19]      Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,

{The gleeman sings}

       40 And gleaming-drink poured. The gleeman sang whilom

{The heroes all rejoice together.}

          Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes' rejoicing,
          A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen.

    [1] B. and S. reject the reading given in H.-So., and suggested by
    Grtvg. B. suggests for 457-458:

               wáere-ryhtum Þú, wine mín Béowulf,
               and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.

    This means: _From the obligations of clientage, my friend Beowulf, and
    for assistance thou hast sought us_.--This gives coherence to
    Hrothgar's opening remarks in VIII., and also introduces a new motive
    for Beowulf's coming to Hrothgar's aid.

    [2] _Sit now at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious
    heroes, as thy spirit urges_.--Kl. reaches the above translation by
    erasing the comma after 'meoto' and reading 'sige-hrèðsecgum.'--There
    are other and bolder emendations and suggestions. Of these the boldest
    is to regard 'meoto' as a verb (imperative), and read 'on sæl': _Think
    upon gayety, etc_.--All the renderings are unsatisfactory, the one
    given in our translation involving a zeugma.




IX.

UNFERTH TAUNTS BEOWULF.


{Unferth, a thane of Hrothgar, is jealous of Beowulf, and undertakes to
twit him.}

          Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,
          Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,
          Opened the jousting (the journey[1] of Beowulf,
          Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth
        5 And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never
          That any man else on earth should attain to,
          Gain under heaven, more glory than he):

{Did you take part in a swimming-match with Breca?}

          "Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,
          On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,
       10 Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,

{'Twas mere folly that actuated you both to risk your lives on the ocean.}

          From vainest vaunting adventured your bodies
          In care of the waters? And no one was able
          Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you
          Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,
       15 Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,
          The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,
          Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,
          With the weltering of winter. In the water's possession,
          Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,
       20 In strength excelled thee. Then early at morning
          On the Heathoremes' shore the holm-currents tossed him,
          Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,
          Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,
          The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,
[20]   25 Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made thee

{Breca outdid you entirely.}

          The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.
          Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,

{Much more will Grendel outdo you, if you vie with him in prowess.}

          Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,
          A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest
       30 For the space of a night near-by to wait for!"

{Beowulf retaliates.}

          Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:
          "My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,

{O friend Unferth, you are fuddled with beer, and cannot talk coherently.}

          Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,
          Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,
       35 That greater strength in the waters I had then,
          Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.
          We made agreement as the merest of striplings
          Promised each other (both of us then were

{We simply kept an engagement made in early life.}

          Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure
       40 Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.
          While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded
          Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected
          To shield from the sharks. He sure was unable

{He _could_ not excel me, and I _would_ not excel him.}

          To swim on the waters further than I could,
       45 More swift on the waves, nor _would_ I from him go.
          Then we two companions stayed in the ocean

{After five days the currents separated us.}

          Five nights together, till the currents did part us,
          The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,
          And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled
       50 Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.
          The mere fishes' mood was mightily ruffled:
          And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,
          Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;
          My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,

{A horrible sea-beast attacked me, but I slew him.}

       55 Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,
          A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,
          Grim in his grapple: 'twas granted me, nathless,
          To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,
          My obedient blade; battle offcarried
       60 The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.

    [1] It has been plausibly suggested that 'síð' (in 501 and in 353)
    means 'arrival.' If so, translate the bracket: _(the arrival of
    Beowulf, the brave seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to Unferth,
    etc.)_.

[21]




X.

BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.--GLEE IS HIGH.


          "So ill-meaning enemies often did cause me
          Sorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,

{My dear sword always served me faithfully.}

          With my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;
          They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,
        5 Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,
          Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;
          But wounded with edges early at morning
          They were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,

{I put a stop to the outrages of the sea-monsters.}

          Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers
       10 No longer thereafter were hindered from sailing
          The foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,
          God's beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,
          That well I could see the nesses projecting,

{Fortune helps the brave earl.}

          The blustering crags. Weird often saveth
       15 The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!
          But me did it fortune[1] to fell with my weapon
          Nine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder
          'Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,
          Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;
       20 Yet I 'scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,

{After that escape I drifted to Finland.}

          Weary from travel. Then the waters bare me
          To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,

{I have never heard of your doing any such bold deeds.}

          The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told me
          Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,
       25 And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca
          At the play of the battle, nor either of you two,
          Feat so fearless performèd with weapons
          Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .
[22]      . . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;

{You are a slayer of brothers, and will suffer damnation, wise as you may
be.}

       30 Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,
          Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get
          Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.
          I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,
          Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,
       35 The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,
          Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,

{Had your acts been as brave as your words, Grendel had not ravaged your
land so long.}

          Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.
          He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,
          The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,
       40 Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:
          Oaths he exacteth, not any he spares

{The monster is not afraid of the Danes,}

          Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,
          Killeth and feasteth, no contest expecteth

{but he will soon learn to dread the Geats.}

          From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor
       45 Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall venture
          To give him a grapple. He shall go who is able
          Bravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning

{On the second day, any warrior may go unmolested to the mead-banquet.}

          Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,
          O'er children of men shines from the southward!"
       50 Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure

{Hrothgar's spirits are revived.}

          Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish ruler
          Expected assistance; the people's protector

{The old king trusts Beowulf. The heroes are joyful.}

          Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.
          There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,
       55 The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,

{Queen Wealhtheow plays the hostess.}

          Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,
          Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,
          And the freeborn woman the beaker presented

{She offers the cup to her husband first.}

          To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,
       60 Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,
          Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted
          Of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.
          The Helmingish lady then graciously circled
          'Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:

[23]

{She gives presents to the heroes.}

       65 Treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded
          That the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen

{Then she offers the cup to Beowulf, thanking God that aid has come.}

          Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o'errunning;
          She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,
          Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,
       70 That in any of earlmen she ever should look for
          Solace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,
          Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow's giving,

{Beowulf states to the queen the object of his visit.}

          Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,
          Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:
       75 "I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,

{I determined to do or die.}

          When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,
          I would work to the fullest the will of your people
          Or in foe's-clutches fastened fall in the battle.
          Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,
       80 Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall."
          These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,
          The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broidered
          Went the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.

{Glee is high.}

          Then again as of yore was heard in the building
       85 Courtly discussion, conquerors' shouting,
          Heroes were happy, till Healfdene's son would
          Go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;
          For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he
          A fight was determined,[2] since the light of the sun they
       90 No longer could see, and lowering darkness
          O'er all had descended, and dark under heaven
          Shadowy shapes came shying around them.

{Hrothgar retires, leaving Beowulf in charge of the hall.}

          The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,
          Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,
       95 Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving
          To his care and keeping, quoth he departing:
[24]      "Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,
          But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,
          Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.
      100 Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;
          Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,
          Watch 'gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,
          Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!"

    [1] The repetition of 'hwæðere' (574 and 578) is regarded by some
    scholars as a defect. B. suggests 'swá Þær' for the first: _So there
    it befell me, etc._ Another suggestion is to change the second
    'hwæðere' into 'swá Þær': _So there I escaped with my life, etc._

    [2] Kl. suggests a period after 'determined.' This would give the
    passage as follows: _Since they no longer could see the light of the
    sun, and lowering darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens
    shadowy beings came going around them_.




XI.

ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE.


{Hrothgar retires.}

          Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,
          Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;
          The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,
          The queen for a bedmate. To keep away Grendel

{God has provided a watch for the hall.}

        5 The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,
          As men heard recounted: for the king of the Danemen
          He did special service, gave the giant a watcher:
          And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trusted

{Beowulf is self-confident}

          His warlike strength and the Wielder's protection.

{He prepares for rest.}

       10 His armor of iron off him he did then,
          His helmet from his head, to his henchman committed
          His chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,
          And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.
          The good one then uttered words of defiance,
       15 Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:

{Beowulf boasts of his ability to cope with Grendel.}

          "I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,
          In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;
          Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,
          Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.

{We will fight with nature's weapons only.}

       20 No battle-skill[1] has he, that blows he should strike me,
          To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty
[25]      In strife and destruction; but struggling by night we
          Shall do without edges, dare he to look for
          Weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father
       25 The glory apportion, God ever-holy,

{God may decide who shall conquer}

          On which hand soever to him seemeth proper."
          Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,
          The pillow received the cheek of the noble;

{The Geatish warriors lie down.}

          And many a martial mere-thane attending
       30 Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikely

{They thought it very unlikely that they should ever see their homes
again.}

          That ever thereafter any should hope to
          Be happy at home, hero-friends visit
          Or the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;
          They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,
       35 Had recently ravished, of the race of the Scyldings

{But God raised up a deliverer.}

          Too many by far. But the Lord to them granted
          The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes
          Aid and comfort, that every opponent
          By one man's war-might they worsted and vanquished,

{God rules the world.}

       40 By the might of himself; the truth is established
          That God Almighty hath governed for ages
          Kindreds and nations. A night very lurid

{Grendel comes to Heorot.}

          The trav'ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.
          The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,

{Only one warrior is awake.}

       45 One only excepted. 'Mid earthmen 'twas 'stablished,
          Th' implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them
          To the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;
          But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,
          He angrily bided the issue of battle.[2]

    [1] Gr. understood 'gódra' as meaning 'advantages in battle.' This
    rendering H.-So. rejects. The latter takes the passage as meaning that
    Grendel, though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.

    [2] B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B. XII.) rejects
    the division usually made at this point, 'Þá.' (711), usually rendered
    'then,' he translates 'when,' and connects its clause with the
    foregoing sentence. These changes he makes to reduce the number of
    'cóm's' as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711, 721.) With all deference to
    this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to me that the poet is
    exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event on
    which the whole subsequent action turns. First, he (Grendel) came _in
    the wan night_; second, he came _from the moor_; third, he came _to
    the hall_. Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.

[26]




XII.

GRENDEL AND BEOWULF.


{Grendel comes from the fens.}

          'Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then
          Grendel going, God's anger bare he.
          The monster intended some one of earthmen
          In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:

{He goes towards the joyous building.}

        5 He went under welkin where well he knew of
          The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,
          Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasion

{This was not his first visit there.}

          He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:
          Ne'er found he in life-days later nor earlier
       10 Hardier hero, hall-thanes[1] more sturdy!
          Then came to the building the warrior marching,

{His horrid fingers tear the door open.}

          Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly opened
          On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;
          The fell one had flung then--his fury so bitter--
       15 Open the entrance. Early thereafter
          The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,

{He strides furiously into the hall.}

          Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered
          A lustre unlovely likest to fire.
          He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,
       20 A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,

{He exults over his supposed prey.}

          A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,
          He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen
          The life from his body, horrible demon,
          Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him

{Fate has decreed that he shall devour no more heroes. Beowulf suffers
from suspense.}

       25 The prospect of plenty. Providence willed not
          To permit him any more of men under heaven
          To eat in the night-time. Higelac's kinsman
          Great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature
[27]      In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.
       30 No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,

{Grendel immediately seizes a sleeping warrior, and devours him.}

          But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of
          A soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,
          Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,
          Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man's
       35 Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.
          Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior

{Beowulf and Grendel grapple.}

          Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,
          Forward the foeman foined with his hand;
          Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,
       40 On his elbow he rested. This early discovered
          The master of malice, that in middle-earth's regions,
          'Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater

{The monster is amazed at Beowulf's strength.}

          In any man else had he ever encountered:
          Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,
       45 Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,

{He is anxious to flee.}

          Would fly to his covert, seek the devils' assembly:
          His calling no more was the same he had followed
          Long in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthy

{Beowulf recalls his boast of the evening, and determines to fulfil it.}

          Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,
       50 Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.
          His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,
          The earl stepped farther. The famous one minded
          To flee away farther, if he found an occasion,
          And off and away, avoiding delay,
       55 To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of
          The strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.

{'Twas a luckless day for Grendel.}

          'Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,
          Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:

{The hall groans.}

          The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,
       60 Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,
          Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,
          Archwarders raging.[2] Rattled the building;
[28]      'Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then
          The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,
       65 Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it
          Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,
          By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill there
          Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,
          Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.
       70 The Scylding wise men weened ne'er before
          That by might and main-strength a man under heaven
          Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,
          Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire
          In smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upward

{Grendel's cries terrify the Danes.}

       75 Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened
          A terror of anguish, on all of the men there
          Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,
  